Title: Challenging the narrative: Why do headlines only highlight Nepal’s downfalls?
Date: Mar 2025
Author: — Supriya Khadka
Image: images/blog1.jpg
Hashtags: #narrative #healines #negativity #positivity #nepal #nepalrise #timetochange

Content: The media is flooded with discouraging headlines about Nepal: “Nepal in Grey List under FATF,” “Nepal Airlines Blacklisted by the EU,” and “Nepal Ranks Among the Most Corrupt Nations.” These narratives paint a dark picture of Nepal’s standing in the global arena.
From school days, we were taught that Nepal is a Least Developed Country (LDC), building a mindset of inferiority. Similarly, the recent incident where KIIT Institute in Odisha, India, ordered Nepali students to leave the campus immediately, raising concerns over human rights violations, adds to this negative portrayal. The ongoing narratives sow seeds of doubt among many Nepali citizens regarding their national identity and future prospects.
There is a claim going around suggests that Nepal has one of the lowest average IQ levels globally, scoring around 42, compared to nearby countries like Bangladesh (74), India (76), Pakistan (80), and Sri Lanka (86).

<h3>World judging Nepal</h3>
<p text-align="justify">However, how are these numbers determined? According to the Times of India, factors such as poverty, malnutrition, under-resourced schools, political instability, and natural disasters have significantly impacted education and intellectual growth in the region. Furthermore, as Polytechnique Insights explains, IQ tests are not absolute indicators of intelligence; they are, about making relative judgments that come with their own biases and inaccuracies.
Nepal’s ranking in various global indexes does indicate challenges. The Henley Passport Index places Nepal 101st that reflects limited visa-free access to various other countries. The Corruption Perceptions Index ranks Nepal 108th out of 180 countries, emphasising governance issues.
These facts are undeniable, but the question remains: why do global evaluators or indicators consistently highlight only the negatives?
Continuous negative portrayals create economic and diplomatic challenges. If Nepal is continuously labeled as corrupt and unstable, it discourages foreign investment, tourism, and international trust. Investors hesitate, and tourism, one of Nepal’s strongest economic sectors, suffers as potential visitors perceive Nepal as an insecure destination. The more Nepal is seen as a high-risk country, the harder it becomes to attract foreign collaborations, funding, and development opportunities.
A notable example is the current US President Donald Trump’s stating aid provided to Nepal is nothing but ‘Fraud’. While this criticism was directed at Nepal’s administration, it also serves as a call for all the Nepali to wake-up. Instead of relying on foreign grants, Nepal should focus on self-sufficiency and accountability, ensuring national resources are efficiently utilised.
</p>
<h3>Other side of Nepal</h3>
<p text-align="justify">Nepal is more than just a collection of negative headlines. It is a country of resilience, culture, and potential, and it is time the world sees that. There are several positive instances of Nepal that deserve global recognition. The Nepali people have made remarkable progress across various sectors, including IT, sports, tourism and several other which needs to be recorded and highlighted.
One recent achievement highlights Nepal’s growing presence in the ICT sector, “In 2024, Nepal was among the top three countries to receive the highest awards from Meta’s Bug Bounty Program.”
This reflects Nepal’s increasing expertise in cybersecurity and digital innovation. Likewise, the Nepali women’s football team is making remarks on the international stage, with several players now playing in international football clubs.

The men’s cricket team is also gaining significant recognition in the sports world, while there are several achievements of Nepali in other sports field as well. This picturizes the progress of Nepal in various sports in the domestic as well as international platforms.
Tourism, Nepal’s largest industry, contributes significantly to the national GDP. It continues to shine due to the country’s natural beauty, cultural heritage, and adventure tourism opportunities. From solo traveling and trekking to experiencing Nepal’s rich traditions, the country presents a unique and enriching experience for visitors.
Beyond its landscapes, thousands of historical and religious sites attract millions of devotees and tourists every year. Nepal has consistently been ranked among the top travel destinations by renowned platforms such as Lonely Planet, TripAdvisor, and so on which highlight its breathtaking landscapes, cultural diversity, and affordability for travelers.
Additionally, young entrepreneurs in Nepal are driving innovation through startups in various industries. Their enthusiasm and ambition reflect the potential for Nepal to establish itself as a hub for entrepreneurship and business growth on a global scale.
</p>
<h3>Time to change the narrative</h3>
<p text-align="justify">Despite these achievements, there is rarely any positive news about Nepal reported domestically and virtually none on international media. The negative portrayal of Nepal is continuous, and it erases the country’s academic, industrial, and social progress, which suggests a status quo. The current narrative needs to change, and the brighter side of Nepal needs to be focused.
With time and solidarity, Nepal can rise with the support of the international community. The nation’s progress should be recognized alongside its challenges, ensuring a balanced and fair representation that inspires confidence in Nepal’s future.
It is now or never! If we, as Nepali citizens, do not take ownership of our progress, who will?
We need to create a trustworthy and investor-friendly environment, not only to change the global perspective of Nepal but also to ensure prosperity for future generations. Nepal has been producing skilled human capital, yet most of them seek opportunities abroad. Instead of letting other nations benefit from our talent, we must work towards harnessing these skills to build our own nation.
Nepal is more than just negative storylines, it is a country with several potential that deserves global recognition via headlines itself.
</p>
<a href="https://english.onlinekhabar.com/challenging-the-narrative-why-do-headlines-only-highlight-nepals-downfalls.html" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Click Here to read at OnlineKhabar.com</i></a>